Proposal: Autoreborrow traits (#339)
rust-lang/rust-project-goals: src/2025h2/autoreborrow-traits.md

Users of `reborrow` crate and similar should be enabled to move to core solution.

## Design axioms

- Accept the definition of reborrowing as "a memory copy with added lifetime analysis".
  - This disallows running user code on reborrow.
  - "Reborrow-as-shared" likely needs to run user code; this'd preferably be ignored where possible.
- Must achieve true reborrowing, not a fascimile.
  - Current userland reborrowing uses `T::reborrow_mut` functions that achieve the most important part of
    reborrowing, temporarily disabled `T` upon reborrow.
  - Userland cannot achieve true reborrowing: true reborrowing does not constrain the lifetime of `T`,
    whereas userland fascimile does.
  - Difference is in whether values derived from a reborrow can be returned past the point of the reborrow.
- Performance of the solution must be trivial: reborrow is checked for at every coercion site. This cannot be
  slow.
- Make sure autoreborrowing doesn't become a vehicle for implicit type coercion. Allowing autoreborrowing
  from `T` to multiple values could be abused to define a `CustomInt(int128)` that coerces to all integer

>   types.

Author: Hmm... I'd first assume that coercion would only happen with `Copy` types, and perhaps `Clone` types, but never with `Reborrow: !Copy` types. If that holds, then a general coercion mechanism would be nicely separated from autoreborrowing. If that is _not_ the case, then we definitely would end up with some interactions: I'd then assume that if a `T: Reborrow + !Copy` gets coerced into `U` that it would first reborrow the original `T` instead of moving out of it.

So; maybe coercion isn't closed out by reborrowing? They would have an interaction, but at least on first brush it seems like it would be a fairly easy interaction to explain and define.

Regarding Autoref I think I've mostly considered this in [the method probing section](https://github.com/aapoalas/rfcs/blob/autoreborrow-traits/text/0000-autoreborrow-traits.md#compiler-changes-method-probing), in that a `Exclusive: CoerceShared<Target = Shared>` type will also add `Shared` to its method probing path. Whether `Exclusive` or `Shared` is actually something like `Mut<T>` and provides an Autoref mechanism for `T` is then up to the type itself and whether it implements `Receiver<Target = T>`. In effect, `CoerceShared` opens up one extra "direction" that method lookup can take, but it shouldn't have further interacitons beyond that. ... I think :)

>   types.

Reviewer: The interaction you described sounds correct to me. I think the times I want a `Reborrow` type to also support coercion are exactly what `CoerceShared` is for. Except I might want multiple directions, e.g. by adding a generic argument to `CoerceShared` instead of an associated type.

A maximalist sketch (without invoking user-defined code) might look something like this:

```
trait Coerce<T: Copy> {}
impl Coerce<&T> for &mut T {}
impl Coerce<CppMut<T>> for &mut T {}
impl Coerce<CppRef<T>> for &T {}
```

Do we agree that `CoerceShared` is essentially a more conservative version of `Coerce`, and that the rules for implementing it `CoerceShared` apply for the more general `Coerce`?

The comment I linked above describes how this can be done in a slightly limited (but still useful) way without troubling implications for compile times. It was originally intended to be limited to autoref for method receivers only, not general coercions. This proposal extends to all coercion sites, but only supports one target.

This will leave us with a design question of whether to support one or both (or neither) and, if both, whether it should share the same mechanism (as in the `Coerce` trait above) or separate mechanisms (as in separate `CoerceShared` and `Autoref` traits). Finally, your RFC raises the interesting possibility of automatically invoking `From` impls at coercion sites, which would be a further expansion of the `Coerce` or `CoerceShared` direction.

  - Autoreborrow traits should use an associated type instead of a type parameter.
  - Autoreborrowing at coercion sites should not dovetail into eg. an `Into::into` call.

## Ownership and team asks

| Task                         | Owner(s) or team(s) | Notes |
|------------------------------|---------------------|-------|
| Discussion and moral support | ![Team][] [lang]    | Normal RFC process |

> | Help around impl             | ![Team][] [compiler]| Trait-impl querying in rustc to replace `Pin<&mut T>` special case |

Reviewer: I anticipate this being slow, which is one of the reasons for my suggestion below to use an attribute on fields.

Author: Is it slow for rustc to query a type `T` for if `T: Trait`? Currently there's a check for if a `T` is an ADT and it matches the `Pin` type, and contains `&mut T` inside it. If this is true, then a custom autoreborrow adjustment is injected at a coercion place.

Autoreborrow traits would change that check to be "if `T` is an ADT and it implements `T: Reborrow`". Checking fields of `T` or anything like that wouldn't come into it at all.

Reviewer 2: (also: to pass CI

```suggestion
| Standard reviews             | ![Team][] [compiler]| Trait-impl querying in rustc to replace `Pin<&mut T>` special case |
```
)

| Do the work                  | @aapoalas           |       |

### Design autoreborrow internals

The basic idea of autoreborrowing is simple enough: when a reborrowable type is encountered at a coercion

> site, attempt a reborrow operation.

Reviewer: To check my understanding: The reborrow operation *always* occurs, even if it's not needed for the code to compile. Is that correct?

Complications arise when reborrowing becomes recursive: if a `struct X { a: A, b: B }` contains two
reborrowable types `A` and `B`, then we'd want the reborrow of `X` to be performed "piecewise". As an
example, the following type should, upon reborrow, only invalidate any values that depend on the `'a` lifetime while any values dependent on the `'b` lifetime should still be usable as normal.

```rust
struct X<'a, 'b> {
    a: &'a mut A,
    b: &'b B,
}
```

To enable this, reborrowing needs to be defined as a recursive operation but what the "bottom-case" is, that
is the question. One option would be to use `!Copy + Reborrow` fields, another would use core marker types

> like `PhantomExclusive<'a>` and `PhantomShared<'b>` to discern the difference.

Reviewer: Would an attribute on the fields themselves work?

I would guess most structs would only have one field that gets reborrowed at a time, but some would have more than one. Does that sound right to you?

| Task                 | Owner(s) or team(s)                | Notes                                                               |
|----------------------|------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Lang-team experiment | ![Team][] [lang]                   | allows coding pre-RFC; only for trusted contributors                |
| Author RFC           | *Goal point of contact, typically* |                                                                     |
| Lang-team champion   | ![Team][] [lang]                   | Username here |
| RFC decision         | ![Team][] [lang]                   |                                                                     |

> | Secondary RFC review | ![Team][] [types]                  | request bandwidth from a second team, most features don't need this |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| RFC secondary review | ![Team][] [types]                  | request bandwidth from a second team, most features don't need this |
```

### Implement non-recursive autoreborrowing

A basic autoreborrowing feature should not be too complicated: the `Pin<&mut T>` special-case in the

> compiler already exists and could probably be reimagined to rely on a `Reborrow` trait.

Reviewer: I'd be curious about any differences in behavior between the current implementation and the Reborrow one.

| Task                              | Owner(s) or team(s)                | Notes |
|-----------------------------------|------------------------------------|-------|
| Implementation                    | *Goal point of contact, typically* |       |
| Standard reviews                  | ![Team][] [compiler]               |       |
| Lang-team champion                | ![Team][] [lang]                   |       |
| Design meeting                    | ![Team][] [lang]                   |       |

> | Author call for testing blog post | *Goal point of contact, typically* |       |

Reviewer: I'd ideally like to see stabilization for pin reborrowing only in H2 or early H1. Do you think that would fit into this goal?
